We review and report individual schools and services
and also look at how our education
system's delivering nationally.
2024 to 25 was a successful year for ero,
where we reviewed nearly a third of all schools
and early learning services in New Zealand.
We delivered five national reports, including NCA,
relationships and sexuality education,
chronic truancy counseling schools in oral language.
Recently, since the end of that year,
we've also published reports on attendance,
English and maths and cell phones.
And I'm happy to answer questions on those.
In doing this work, we visited
and reviewed 745 schools in Kura,
over 1,200 EC services.
And we had over 60,000 respondents from teachers, parents,
boards, leaders to our surveys.
And over 2000 interviews with teachers,
leaders, parents and students.
Three quarters of the schools
and services inform us
that our reports help shape their decisions
and their practice, which is really encouraging.
And positively. Over 43,000 people last year access accessed
our national reviews online.
When we look at what we're seeing,
which I think is what interests you the most.
So this year Eero actually saw encouraging signs
of improvement in education.
This I'd like to say, is thanks to the hard work we saw
of teachers in classrooms up and down the country,
and they should be recognized.
This year we saw more early learning services meet the
expected quality standards that Euro sets.
So that was 53% compared to 36% in the previous year.
We saw attendance improved to pre COVID levels,
and for the first time we now saw students thinking going
to school every day is more important.
This is encouraging.
Eero assessed a quarter of schools
as having improved in teaching and learning,
and a third having improved in curriculum and leadership.
And our national reviews found early signs
of improvement in English and maths
and primary schools with half
of teachers reporting an improvement.
But chair there is further to go
ERA remains very concerned in three areas.
The first is the variable quality
of early childhood education.
47% of services we reviewed in
that year did not meet our quality threshold
and we need to do better for our youngest children.
Our secondary of concern is schools that are struggling
to deliver the quality of education.
In 24 25, we had ongoing work in 168 schools
of concern across the country
and we recommended intervention
by the ministry in 32 schools.
These schools that are struggling are a concern to us
because of the impact that they have on students'
opportunities, students' learning, and students' future.
And an era that's the heart of what we do, is making sure
that every child, no matter where they live, gets access
to equality education.
The third area of concern is while we are seeing encouraging
signs, there is still a large mountain to climb in terms
of student achievement.
In 2024, only a quarter
of year eight students were at the level expected for maths
and writing and only half for reading.
So that was 24
and we're hoping things have improved, but it is a big climb.
So s work, we think continues to be critical.
We will continue rigorously reviewing and reporting.
We will highlight good practice, which is what we do
and share it, but we will also call out
with further actions needed.
And finally, looking forward to 2026.
'cause I, whilst this is backward looking, I wanted to share
with you how excited we are about the year ahead
'cause of the greater impact we could potentially have.
So there is currently legislation in the house
that if passed will mean the era can play a stronger role,
particularly in early childhood hostels,
where if we see something, we can make sure
that action is taken immediately.
And that is encouraging
so we can tackle some of that performance.
And the secondary in schools,
if passed the legislation will mean
that when s recommendations are
that we need improvement in schools,
they can form a legal basis for action
by the ministry, we can have quicker action.
So whilst we strongly review
and report, we're encouraged in 2026 of the way
that our reports can have greater impact.
So in conclusion, we'll say it's been a, a busy and exciting
and impactful year previously,
but we're looking ahead to continue
to have this really critical role
that we think we play in delivering for our children
by making sure that we're out there
and looking at the quality of education every children gets.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Um,
Lawrence, and then, um, thank you Chair.
Uh, just noting that although we don't have a structured
agenda for this session,
but I wanna start by, um, the review work that you're doing
to schools and ece and then may later on we can talk more
about some of the reports
that you've produced as well. Yeah. In
That case, may I invite my colleague
Shelley, who runs the review?
Sarah, of course. Yeah. Shelley, if you'd like
to take a seat them we'll together, answer your
Questions. Thank you.
Um, first of all, I think one
of the things we mentioned to thank you for coming
by the way, uh, one of the first things we mentioned last
year in the review of e is when you do do reviews
and when you do, do reports, how well they're being followed
through under the next step.
So that's actually really hardening to see in terms
of some of the, the follow through.
My first question to you is around, um,
so you mentioned the quality EC is one of the concerns
that you see, 47% did not meet the quality threshold.
Is that the quality of threshold in terms of education?
Was that in terms of health and safety
or safeguards, et cetera?
Can you just unpack that 47%?
Sure. So, um, in early childhood education reviews,
we make explicit judgements about quality above
or below a standard for teaching
and learning, professional capability, leadership
and governance organizational management, which includes,
um, provide provision of a safe, inclusive environment.
So we are making judgements across all
of those domains when we make a decision about, um, above
or below quality using, uh, improvement frameworks to,
to um, look at what's above and what's below.
Um, can I just check, uh, so this is in your,
in standalone services.
When you say standalone services, do you, um,
does the data granulate between in terms of region,
if they're community
and non-profit, if they're private,
if they are kindergarten, do
You So the, so the data you have there is, is
for all standalone services, um, across the country,
which means that they're not within
a governing organization.
The, um, a service that, um, uh,
sometimes they might have up, they have up
to about eight services that they're looking
after as a licensee.
But then, yeah.
Would you be able to provide some of
that granular detail to us? Absolutely.
Yeah. Yeah. You can return
with more granular detail with the breakdown.
Um, and not noting that things like kindergartens are often
in the governing organization.
So should we provide you with both the breakdown
of the governing organizations and the standalone,
That'd be fantastic.
That's actually really, really helpful. Thank you.
Absolutely. Um, couple of, uh, follow up questions. Yep.
Um, so just in terms of the ones that you mentioned
that are struggling, Ruth Yeah.
New Schools that in terms of the schools, yeah.
So what is then the process
or has there been any process where you have recommended
or maybe through MOE, maybe it's not you, um,
there's a process being done to recommend to the minister
that they convert to charter schools.
Has that been a consideration?
So the conversion of charter schools, which sits
with the charter schools board and um,
and the charter schools agency.
So that conversion doesn't sit with us.
Our role is to review, yeah.
And to make recommendations about improvements needed.
Those then go to, if there are varies of schools
of serious concern, those go to the Secretary
of Education in terms of concerns.
Again, that's the path and
that's the path for taking that forward.
That's what we, in terms of conversions, that's outside our
Remit. That's all good. We've got
Ministry of Education
after this so we can follow
on the next step. Can follow, follow.
But we are very encouraged
by the changes in the legislation, which mean
that those recommendations can form a more
solid base for action. And that's really good.
My next, any, any other steps? Yes. Okay. Yeah.
Um, my, I'll, I'll keep this to my last sub,
um, for the time being chair.
Thank you so much. Uh, no gracious.
It's really good to see some of the, um, results
that's coming through in terms of Maori medium education,
both in terms of the CCC
and schools that's serving AKA Maori.
But what I'm not seeing is, what is your review on
Akaka Maori in English medium schools?
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So what sort
of work being done in that area?
Absolutely. Deb, would you like
to definitely start working for Akari in both
English medium and Maori medium?
And she can talk to you, um, about,
so whatever this is Deb guys.
Uh, and uh, Deb will tell you just briefly
'cause of course your time about the work that we do there.
Uh, so in Maori medium, we actually take care of,
which is made up of about 470 odd spaces in ECE
and into mm-hmm.
And Puna. And in that space we're working hard, uh,
on a comprehensive process to ensure
that we understand the quality of teaching and learning
and the health and safety of the children in schools.
We have 180,000 Maori learners.
So that is where the majority of our learners are placed.
We have ACO framework
and this framework is made up of the conditions
that we believe leave a success.
Uh, we have a specialist Maori team,
which we're very proud of.
There's five of them that go around 204
schools, English medium schools that have mki
and UA units.
But what I'm asking for, sorry, it's AKA Maori
who are not in those,
because 92% of AKA Maori are not in English media,
are not in Maori medium schools.
And I know we've got bilingual ones
and that's a kind of a special thing.
Yes. But I'm talking about what sort of some of the,
the reviews that we've done
and observings done in schools that is pure
English medium, let's say organ grammar.
Yes. Um, and how are being served within those kind of
Environments. So
ERO wants to know from all schools, when we're speaking
with boards and leaders
and kaiko, what is the quality of teaching
that ensures equitable outcomes for Maori?
Mm-hmm. So we're constantly asking
questions, what are you doing?
What are the aspirations?
How do you know, are you speaking with Wau?
What are the challenges? What are your next steps?
And what's the feedback?
The feedback is most of our schools are working hard
to ensure that Maori needs are being
met. Well,
You've got a sub on this.
Uh, I do have a sub.
Um, and then I have a, oh, I've got a sub.
So do you sub? Yep. Okay. Thank you.
Um, Kilda, thank you.
You talked about, um, the,
I'm assuming it's in terms of the schools of concern report,
um, and that you are looking forward
to the changes in the legislation that is going
to perhaps allow, uh, more to be done in terms
of the recommendations that come through from, um,
the Education Review office.
Are you, um, currently undertaking a report
on failing schools?
Are we currently taking a national review about why do
schools struggle and what support helps them improve?
And that National Review report will be published next June.
June, is it? Yes.
And I mean that, um, report mm-hmm.
Will no doubt be, um, the changes proposed changes
to the legislation will be helpful
for any findings from that report. Right.
Um, so there's, they're totally different things.
If I just explain for a second, if that's okay.
Um, so the, uh, legisl proposed legislative changes
are about to make things happen relatively smoother
and particularly for reduced burdens on schools.
So the ERA and the ministry are working in a more joined up
way where rather hero's findings
and recommendations, if we find a school needs more support
at the moment, there's a chance
that ministry might go in and look again.
Whereas we can cut that out
and just say, here are s
findings, you can go and act on them.
So that's what those changes are.
It's about smoother, seamless,
nothing gets lost in the middle.
And also that schools get the tiny support they
need and there's no delay.
So that's the legislation.
The National Review report we've been asked to look at, um,
is to look at, in New Zealand we have a large number
of schools which may need additional support.
And the question we're asking is,
in New Zealand's context, why do schools struggle?
What are those risk factors? Mm-hmm.
What support do they need?
Is the current support
and interventions for those schools adequate?
Is it timely? Is it proportionate?
Does it happen at the right level, at the right time?
And talking to many of the peak bodies at the moment,
they're very encouraged and welcome with this report.
'cause they've got a lot of concerns at the moment about
whether we're giving schools the need,
the support they need when they need
it as a national review.
We will look at that independently.
We will draw on the feedback of teachers across the country
and then we will publish our findings publicly
and of course share it with you.
And, uh, just a supplementary to that, you said
that you were asked to look at that.
Who asked you to look at that?
Um, this report is being commissioned by the minister.
So under the act, um, the Education Act, um,
our national reviews are commissioned either by the minister
or by the Chief Review officer.
And that's always been the way.
So when we look back across the years, every year,
our reviews are a mixture of minister commissioned reports
and ones that we did under our own
volition as Chief Review officer.
That hasn't really changed very much across the years.
It looks about the same mix.
So the minister has asked us to look at
and as of the principles, we've talked to our schools,
getting the support they need when they need
and not left to struggle for too long.
Okay. Um, I'll get quick up on that one is what has been
industry's feedback
or the sector's feedback rather to the fact
that this review is being undertaken?
Um, so when I was speaking to some
of the peak bodies recently,
'cause we've uh, just kicked it off.
So we're not yet out in the field. That'll be in term one.
Yeah. And there was broad welcome support
because principals are concerned about whether their
schools, when they're struggling,
they get the right support at the right time doing the right
things and it's proportionate and appropriate.
So there's a lot of frustration out there, I think
that may have been building over years.
And that's why so far that it's been very welcome
and they've been asking to participate heavily in this work.
Mm-hmm. So we will set up an expert advisory group
and we'll be inviting all the sector peak bodies
to nominate people to be on it.
We want to take this, um, forward with the sector
to really open that box for once in New Zealand
and go, do we have the right levers here?
Great. Um, Laura, set us up then I'll come
Back. Yeah. Thank you.
I'm actually very interested in something
that you mentioned, and I was gonna ask this question
anyway, uh, later on.
But in terms of the report that you said being commissioned,
and there are two ways to do it.
Yes. Um, you mentioned it hasn't changed
but actually been doing some analysis on this area.
There has been a substantial increase in terms of reports
that are being commissioned by the minister over the like
com compared to, you know, five years ago.
Um, so if I'm looking at the list of ones
that's been done since 2021, there've been very few,
maybe one a year at most
that's been commissioned by the minister.
But what we're seeing is two being done at least this year
and two last year by the minister.
So there has been a increase.
Could you elaborate on why there's been an increase of
minister initiated reviews?
So we've looked at that
data 'cause I thought you might be interested.
So let me just run you through.
In, uh, 20 22, 23, there were five by era, one
by the minister and one commissioned elsewhere, which is
by the, actually by the peak bodies, uh, 2324.
It was four to 1, 24 to 25. It was two to three.
Uh, this year to date, that's three to one
with three being commissioned by the Chief review officer
and one being commissioned by the minister.
So on these numbers, which are relatively small, which is
'cause we only do five to six national reports a year,
we go in depth into a few things.
There isn't a particular trend that we are seeing.
It's always about that mixture.
Those are the data that we have in terms of we,
and we do track where it's coming from
In similar timeframes or reporting,
Uh, depends what we look at.
Mm. So on cell phones, for example, which is one
that we commissioned, um, we, oh,
we commissioned cell phones because we committed to cabinet
to see whether it's effective.
One of the critical roles Eero can play is tell you
and government whether the investment in changes is having
the impact you want to see.
So we committed to cabinet would look at cell phones.
That one, for example, was relatively fast
because it's relatively contained.
It's an easy question to answer.
When we looked at disability
and disabled education for disabled learners,
that was a very big and long one.
So they vary depending on the topic.
Thank you. And my supplementary was around, um,
the schools of concern.
So is it your view that struggling schools should
copy high performing schools
And No, our, our view is that we need
to work out why schools struggle and on what basis.
As Shelly was saying before, in era when we look at schools,
we look at a range of dimensions.
So it very much depends what is the aspect
that's driving a school to struggle.
Can schools learn from other schools? Definitely.
And that's why our good practice guys,
which capture experience in New Zealand schools have such
high uptake that 43,000 people in New Zealand
are opening them and looking at them.
Because what we do there is we capture schools in
New Zealand, the practice they're doing
and share it with other schools so that not everyone has
to invent the wheel themselves.
But in terms of struggling, it really depends what aspect
is challenging and what co
and what environment you're working
In. So,
um, but in terms of that, like what insights, strategies
and successes from high performing schools
does aero consider applicable across all schools?
I'm referring to the media releases around the time, um, of
that report coming up.
Uh, which report are you referring
to? If you just clarify for me
The schools of concern.
Um, I don't think we have really
Stronger consequences needed for struggling schools.
Is the arrow review office see stronger consequences
needed for struggling schools?
Oh, you're talking about our work?
Not on a national review, but in terms
of institutional reviews, yes.
Thank you for clarifying. That
wasn't one of our national reports.
That's about what we're seeing overall.
So we haven't, as I said, completed a national review.
That's what we're going to do and we'll share that
with you in June in relation
to our work in, um, struggling schools.
Shelly, do you want to talk about what we're seeing there
and the patterns of what we're seeing?
Mm, sure. So, um, majority
of schools are doing a great job for their learners,
but we still see, um, a small group where, um,
they're not making traction
or, um, the attendance achievement assessment are quite
difficult to, um, shift.
And they face quite complex challenges.
Um, they face challenges around teaching, challenges
around leadership, challenges around curriculum.
And often in these schools there may be also significant
concerns around student wellbeing and health and safety.
Uh, but mostly in, in a group of school schools who, um,
have these concerns.
It's the ability that leadership has
to bring about those changes.
So, um, the lack of ability to turn things
around without ministry support.
Are they for like inter, so, um, some are they, like
For like, Though, could you, could you clarify that?
So when you're taking your high performing schools to the
schools of concern
Mm-hmm.
Is it like for like,
Um, generally schools of concern have a number
of challenges that maybe high performing schools don't have,
but we do see, um, instances
where those same challenges exist within a school
and they are performing really well.
And that's usually on the basis of great leadership,
some really good strategic planning, um, teaching, um,
expectations and uh, uh, really high expectations
for success are really high.
And all the supports and, and, um, conditions are in place.
We use a school improvement framework that has the domains
that are research based about what works to improve, um,
things for learners in schools.
Um, so, and
If I could just add to that in your question,
is I think a good one.
Do things apply across some of our national reporters
and has been very welcomed by the sector,
has found some things that all schools do
that make a big difference?
So on attendance, we found
that if you make your learner feel
that they belong at school,
doesn't matter which school you're in,
there are five times more likely
to think daily attendance is important.
Mm-hmm. So there are things which vary between schools,
and then there are some really good evidence based practices
which work in all schools.
Mm-hmm. And those are the ones which we put in our good
practice guide that the sector really welcome
because then they could pick it up
and go, okay, these are things, if I do them,
it's gonna make a big difference. Yeah.
Lance, Gotta stop. Yeah.
Just on on exactly what you mentioned, um,
the thing when it comes to, so, you know, obviously for,
for a number of us, we've visited a lot of schools
and I really want to talk about, um, the struggles
that rural schools are facing.
Yeah. With a variety of factors.
Both, I mean, internal, you're absolutely right in terms
of teaching staff, retention of staff,
retention of leaders mm-hmm.
But also external factors that it's just uncontrollable,
uncontrolled outside the school's.
How do you retain good leaders and good teachers? Mm-hmm.
When you are in a small rural community
and people are struggling to find accommodations, et cetera,
I guess is what is the broader holistic view
that you are taking, um, when you are addressing these sort
of things that are looking both
internal and external factors?
Yeah. So when we look nationally, you're exactly right.
That's something that we've flagged in our reports
as an era we need further work is taking a more bespoke
approach to rural and isolated schools.
Yeah. So to give you two concrete examples,
when we look at the English
and maths introduction of changes,
rural schools have done it hats off to them.
And again, thanks to the teachers,
but they found it much harder
to access their support they needed.
'cause often you're the only teacher in the school.
And that time is really difficult.
When we looked at new principals, we found it's much harder
to get really good new principals in rural schools mm-hmm.
Because you don't have that prior leadership experience.
Mm-hmm. So when we see these things, we do call them
and we make clear recommendations to the ministry
and to government and say with rural schools
and isolated schools, we need to have a bespoke model
that overcome some of those challenges they face.
So we get qualified experience principles in rural schools
and we get them time that they can
go and do the development.
That's so critical.
Any more spark? Um, I, okay now we'll go to, um, yeah,
a primary i a primary, but based on something you said we'll
go to, we'll go to a primary from Vanessa Winnick
and then, um, we'll come to one of those. James.
Uh, well thank you very much
and it's been obviously a really successful,
um, year for you.
Thank you. Um, in terms of the organizational performance
and the ways that you do work, um, how much of that time of,
of your time do you spend
considering the ways in which you do your research
and, um, sort of analyzing if you like,
and reflecting on your own performance
and, um, your own methods?
Absolutely. Would you like to hear about
what we do on our national or
what we do on our institutional or both?
Uh, both.
Okay. So if I start off with national mm-hmm.
And then shell, we'll talk about the
methodologies we review.
Yeah. So when we're looking into our national reviews,
it's really important that they're robust,
they're credible and they're independent.
So what we do to ensure that,
and we keep on building on it, is we partner with some
of the most credible international
partners who do things like us.
So that's in Australia and in the UK in particular.
'cause they've got similarish systems
and make sure that they can peer review our work
and we draw on their evidence and we get peer review.
We also partner with academics to do peer review.
We want that challenge. Mm-hmm.
We run internal challenge sessions. Mm-hmm.
And we also do lessons learned,
but we also have a very rigorous, um, approach
to making sure that the sample size is big enough
and not biased.
Mm-hmm. So we've put a lot of rigor in over recent years
as we're doing these very big subjects like NCA
and early years to make sure
that we have very large amount of data to collect.
And again, I want to say thank you to the teachers
and principals who fill in our surveys in the evenings.
Mm-hmm. Um, and that it's representative
and in no way does it have a swing
to high performing schools or schools that are urban.
And they're definitely not all from Auckland. Yeah.
Um, so we have a multi-layered process, um,
and we review each step
and I really enjoy the time
with our international colleagues where they point out
where we can strengthen it.
Mm-hmm. Um, and that's what we do
before anything goes out the door
because it's really important that
what we say is hero is right.
Mm-hmm. Um, when we look at our national reviews,
we do have a program of work there
and Shirley can tell you about that. Mm-hmm.
Sure. You mean in our institutional? Yes.
So in our institutional reviews, we have a really, um,
strong program of, um, review
and quality assurance around our work.
Mm-hmm. Um, and sometimes external moderation over our
institutional review work as well.
And the findings that come out of those processes, feedback
to professional learning and development for, um, our staff.
Um, so we are quite rigorous about our review
methodology mm-hmm.
And what we expect in terms of reaching a judgment
and forming a judgment and,
and writing a judgment in public report for our schools.
Well, thank you. I mean, that reflects the, the impact
that it has on those schools, um, if they were
to get in at this kind of report
and, um, shows the importance
of what you do. So thank you very
Much. Thank you,
Supplementary. Thank
you. Um, just continuing on in that theme
of organizational health
and capability, um, on page 47, uh,
talks about the wellbeing of your staff.
How would you describe the culture in wellbeing
within your organization?
Within our organization?
Um, so if you may have seen from our public service census,
we have a strong culture of people being dedicated to the,
to the purpose and scoring incredibly highly for being, uh,
related to the purpose.
Um, and they're also scoring very highly in terms of feeling
that they're making a difference and there's high delivery.
The areas which were raised for us as more of a concern,
and I'll tell you what we're doing to address,
is whether the work program is evenly distributed.
As we mentioned earlier, we're in schools
across countries every day.
Sometimes that means a lot
of travel just in fairly remote places.
And that impacts on people's, uh,
tiredness and travel and hours.
The sec, that's one area.
Uh, the second area is about change.
Uh, we've had a lot of change with more to come
and our, our staff are saying we need
to do better on change management.
And lastly as well, whether people always feel safe
to speak up and talk about it when they're struggling.
So we take those very seriously.
It's great that we can bank that people are delivering
and feeling good, but you need to be address these things.
This year we've put in a work program
which has got actions in those three areas.
So, um, uh, we will report quarterly on actions.
So on the first one we're doing some deliberate work program
monitoring to make sure that no person,
if they're traveling very far,
they've got long evening meetings with boards
and parents that we are managing that.
So we're having a tighter grip on that.
Um, on the second area,
we've put in a new change management program so
that people can really see the sequencing
and that's going to be so critical next year when
we're bringing in new functions.
And then lastly, we've put in a speak up campaign.
And alongside that I put in new performance management,
which has got an equal focus
around the behaviors we're expecting to see
so everyone can come to work
and thrive alongside the delivery.
So I think a long answer to your question is, uh,
it's a work in progress with some strengths
and some things that we're working on.
And if you were just to give it a rating in terms of, um,
overall Yes, what is it at now
and where do you think your plan will get you to?
In terms of our overall, um, people,
I would say we are at about a six
and we will get to an eight by this time next year.
And did you notice, um, a change, um, in that,
are the results different to previous years?
Um, I don't know that we're seeing a big difference,
but over to Shelly in terms
of whether we've seen a systematic change,
Um, In terms of your folk people.
Um, in terms of our people, I think that, um, uh,
what Ruth said, one of the, the key findings was
around the way that we, um,
undergo change and change management.
So we have had a lot of change over the last three while.
So giving more visibility
and transparency, um, to our people about what
that change might look like and how it impacts them.
Um, I think we've come through a time
and we are on an improve already.
Some of our internal surveys are showing
that people are appreciating the more clarity
and more, um, sense of forward direction.
And, uh, the scores from our internal surveys are coming
back stronger than they were.
So I, I think we've gone through a time.
Is there anything that you'd add for your
People? Yeah, I think it's
been important for us to acknowledge the,
the corridor and all that's out there.
So in Kapa Maori we are looking at different ways
of working operationally.
It's our small teams
that actually go into those deep dark corners of the MuTu.
Uh, a lot of our URA are, uh,
so we will be looking at, um, them not going out every week
and instead looking at a two phase approach
where they're traveling every second.
So we are making little changes operationally
to address the workload.
Right. So up to mute, um, sorry.
I've got Lawrence and then Thank you. Thank you Chair.
Um, just on something you mentioned
before, Ruth, would you be able to give us the list
of academics that you use for peer reviewing?
I could definitely return to that.
I don't have it in hand, but very happy to.
That'd be fantastic. Um, in terms of, um, names some
of those academics peer review in a confidential way.
So I'll come back to you with what we can provide to this,
but we'll definitely go and go and come back to you.
Okay. Okay. Would you be able to elaborate on why?
I mean, if they're peer reviewing,
I mean anyone in academics would know
that you peer review then needs to be public. Yeah.
So I'll return to you on that one. Okay.
And we'll look at the different subjects, but yeah. Okay.
I also, if you'd like I to include the international
institutions we use as well,
if that would be helpful, that'd be
Helpful as well. Thank you. So we just
recorded that.
Yes, please, Sharon. Sorry, what was it for?
Peer Review. Peer review.
Ah, in the other room. Thank you. Sorry. That's
Okay. Thank you.
Just sticking with culture. Yes.
You did a lot of mahi around giving effect to Yes.
Um, and I understand that that would impact
or the removal of that would impact your staff culture.
What feedback did you have from staff and,
and, uh, how have you addressed that?
So in terms of era, we haven't changed our approach to tei
and we are a Crown agency.
Our obligations on us
as a Crown agency remain it's
committed in throughout our work.
Um, we continue to train people in Teo, uh, TUI Anton, um,
and understanding how to operate well.
'cause it's really important we
deliver for our Maori learners.
Um, Deb actually leads our work program in this space.
And Deb, do you wanna talk a little
bit about the work program?
Yeah, absolutely. So we have a strategy called
focuses on the, the success of all Maori learners.
But for us that means building capability internally
in order to serve our, our k Maori and WAU externally.
So there was no impact
to staff culture based on the removal of Teti from, uh,
your, your work program.
There's no removal from our work program in
terms of a Crown agency.
We continue to review schools in terms
of are they delivering from MA
learners our, our work program.
But just in regard to which has been removed, no, it's,
No, it's, No.
So we are a Crown agency.
Sorry, my, my question is in relation
to the removal of ted. Yeah.
But but you're asking, you're asking
Has there been an impact On the removal
Staff culture? Yeah.
But it's has been removed from their agency. Yes.
So can you just re-clarify your question, Shannon,
and bring it into that? Would, that will help.
So ha has there, has there been
feedback from your staff in relation to
the minister removing, um, giving effect
to Ted DT in the Education and Training Act? So
Before your answer, um, this is an in relation
to the annual review
for the period in which we are reviewing.
So scope, um, well, no, that's, let's pull.
Yeah, I think you're about to, it sounds like you're,
you're getting around to it,
but that's our scope clearly, Mr.
Chair and you need to rule on that.
Yeah. So not what's Exactly, sorry,
It's not in relation to the, um, annual review period.
It's a, a question of, um, reflections on policy, um,
that's unrelated to the, um, to the agency that,
that you are talking about.
Speaking to the point of water. Shannon
Euro within that period reviews
the policy of giving effect to
that puts it in scope.
Um, so I I, I'll I
last speaking to point, I'll say
There's gonna be defensive about this one.
Sorry Shannon, but we're gonna talk about this.
Vanessa had the mark, well
Give the year in review that we're, we're looking at, um,
the legislation that he's bringing in to the question, uh,
wasn't, um, made and,
and hadn't passed until just very recently.
So I don't believe it fits within the period
of time that we're under review.
Um, I'm just gonna move,
I'm just gonna move to that point of order.
Just, sorry, hold on. I'm just gonna move to private.
So if we can, um, cut the recording for a moment
and um, just ask the uh, um,
arrow team and advisor.
I'm not worried whether it's a supper
or a primary, it's just more about how you frame,
so we'll We'll, I'll give the talking stick back to you
talking stick from Yeah, yeah.
But just we have clarified. Excellent.
Nice to see you again. So, well I think there,
there gonna be some more questions.
That's all good. Um, on, on this area
and I um, have made,
we've made clear across, uh, across everyone
that what's in scope is discussion around your activities
during the, um, annual period.
Yes. Uh, anything that you might have taken from reviews
you've conducted, um, recently Yes.
Or any advice you've provided to the minister
and I'll, I'll, that's just sort of framing. Um,
Thank you very much Shannon.
Thank Thank you. And,
and government members have been quite, uh, strict on me
around the type of questions that I ask in relation to this
because it has been of concern.
Um, and I know a number of schools have raised this
as an issue and, uh, written to the minister as a result.
My first question is, um, what advice
and feedback did you provide to the minister in relation
to the change of policy
and removal of from the responsibilities of board
of trustees within the period? Yeah,
So the Education Review Office
doesn't provide policy advice.
That is the Ministry for Education. It's outside our remit.
So we don't provide advice on section 1, 2 7. Okay.
So you weren't consulted? I
Don't think so. We can triple
check, but it is, we um, it is,
we are not a policy advice agency. So,
And, and so given the, the work
that you have done previously on it,
did you provide any information to the minister
During the period during that period,
During that whole year period? Can
I go and triple check? 'cause I'd hate
to give you an answer,
but we don't provide policy advice, information or
Provide that Question.
Yeah, I mean, I don't want to give you somewhere I haven't
just info checked.
Um, we'll go back
and scour through our records to make sure.
Um, but our general position is Aero's role is to review
and report on the quality of education.
And we do that in schools, um,
through our board assurance statements,
through our school improvement framework.
And that's what we review and report on.
And have any of your staff raised concerns in relation
to this particular issue?
We don't, um, ask our staff about their personal views
to political positions as public servants.
It's very important that we serve the government of the day
and we do not collect
or ask for information about their personal. That's
Not you asking. Can
we please Shannon, can
We, if they raised concerns is my question.
I don't collect anything that
as chief executive I could report in terms
of their views on political positions
that arrange is not just this,
but any other policy position, political view.
Okay. Um, in terms of policy going,
so being clear a policy position,
we don't ask our staff individually
for their personal views on policy positions.
A policy Position. I'm gonna accept from you if we talk
over, I'll just move on the, let let the,
um, individuals finish.
I, I appreciate, um, that Mr.
Chair, I just think
that there is a misunderstanding between the
Oh, used yourself crafting.
Yeah. Um, so it,
So I'm giving you the opportunity to ask yourself. It's
Not to be No, I'm just explaining before I ask myself.
It's not to be rude to talk over. Okay.
But when the question isn't being, uh, understood
as it's being asked, it's to clarify not
to be antagonist, but
I'll give you another sub to do that.
Okay. Yeah, just let her finish her sentence far away.
Um, given
that it has been in the act since 2020, uh,
Eero would have reported on schools meeting their strategic
plans, um,
and the requirement to meet those, uh, things around.
Um, and so
the question is in terms of that, is there any information
or advice that you have
provided to, um, the ministry,
the minister's office in terms of that?
Because one of the claims that the minister makes is there
is no link between, um, achievement
and the board's um, or Wang obligations
and any improvement in that area.
We have not provided advice to the minister about the link
between that particular requirement in the ACT
and achievement for MA that we see.
Um, in relation to your prior question, just
so I'm being clear, we do board assurance statements.
Um, this change came in in November,
so we're currently working through the changes.
So we haven't yet got to the bit
where we've changed our board assurance statement
that will start in term one next year.
So at the moment we don't have data about what's happening
under the new legislation
because that's literally just passed.
Yeah. From term one next year we'll have that in place
And final We can track it.
Uh, final stop on that one.
Uh, and just to clarify, um,
'cause I think the answers were uh, no policy advice.
So my question is did you provide any advice
or any information on this to the ministry or the minister?
I apologize. I didn't mean to be avoiding your question.
I was, uh, answering genuinely.
No, we do not provide advice on, um,
this change to legislation.
We don't generally provide advice on changes to legislation
Or you need information, Um,
and any information that I'm aware of.
But I will definitely thank you.
As you know, this is day seven as chief executive. Mm-hmm.
So I would like the courtesy if that's okay with you to go
and triple check that I've given you the correct answer.
Uh, and Ruth, I was a miss not too
formally congratulate you.
Thank you. Uh, at the beginning of the meeting.
So just to sub on this,
and I think this follows on in terms of,
and please do let us know
because what I have is, um, an OIA that says
that this is someone, I'm assuming the administrators,
we wanna steer on Euro's proposal below on amendment
to section 1 27.
Mm-hmm. Um, so that's something has been,
advice has been given on various part.
But I think the part that,
and that this, to be fair to approach full transparency,
this is including a requirement for school boards
to use quality assessment reporting
on students then progress.
So that was I guess in some ways a policy
From. And so that, so when it's from,
How does that work? Yeah.
Yeah. If, thank you. Sorry to interrupt. No, no, no,
You are good. Uh,
I just, yeah.
When changes happen, which requires
to operationally implement something new, um, so
for example in terms of school reporting,
maybe Shelly can talk about that.
Which requires us when you introduce a cell phone
requirement, it requires zero to go out there and check it.
Interesting. Okay. Um, when you introduce their hour a day
requirement arrows, the people who go
and check that schools are doing it.
So if there are new requirements on schools as part of that,
of course they need to ask Erin,
can we do the new requirement on schools?
Shelley, in relation to this
one, is there anything you'd add?
Um, no. No not really. Um, but Ruth's right.
Any legislation changes, we need to think about what
that means for our reviewing work.
Yeah. And we need to think about, um, what it means in terms
of changing a board assurance statement Yeah.
Or our guidelines, um, for our people and yes. So
I've gotta stop on that. Yes.
Um, so in terms of
what you've just mentioned about the change
to the school phone, um Yes.
Ban and to the implementation of the hour day of reading,
writing, um, and arithmetic.
How have those implementations gone
during the period under review?
Thank you. Um, so those are ones
where we advised originally about how can we do it.
So in terms of cell phones, um,
we are seeing some very encouraging results.
So we just published our results on cell phones, uh,
just all got a few weeks ago.
Um, we are pleased to say they're making a big difference.
So we are seeing that there's an increased
focus in classrooms.
Eight outta 10 teachers are reporting
that there's an increased, um,
achievement from not being distracted on your phone when
you're trying to do a maths question, which is two thirds
of teachers are of say, improvement in behavior
from not being distracted.
And one of the most encouraging results is that two thirds
of leaders said there's been a reduction in bullying
in the school by not having cell phones out.
Wow. So these are some
of the most encouraging results we've seen.
And again, I would just like to have a shout out
to the teachers and leaders across the country
who have been out there implementing this spam.
Uh, we found out the things that work the most
and we've been sharing that.
So having really clear expectations works really well.
Having clear consequences, which means taking the phone
and phoning the parents, um,
works really well for compliance.
Yeah. Um, we did
however, chair, um, whilst this is a really strong story,
we have further to go because half
of senior secondary school students are
not always compliant.
And we found that often that is because they're contacted
or are contacting their parents.
So, uh, we have a little bit further to go in terms
of un making parents understand that we need to go back
to the old days where you go via the school office
because if your child's trying
to do a complicated maths question, it is better
that their phone is not out
and they're not responding to you about pickup time,
school kids and other things.
So it's a good story so far,
but we need parents to get a little bit more on board.
Mm. And less contacting their students during the daytime.
Right. Thank you. I've got a, um,
question on cell phone banks.
Yes. That, what's your sub on? Um,
I've got a few subs on based on a lot
of the things they've been saying and I just wanna get a bit
of clarification on those subs.
Oh, we're talking about school.
Uh, we moved on school, phone phones, writing that stuff
'cause we've got not a lot of time left.
So if the stuff are related to where we are now,
happy to take yours first.
Yeah. I mean, uh, I can, I can do one on the, one
of the things you just said in terms of bullying.
Yeah. Um, because that's really, um, informative,
uh, in terms of that report.
What I didn't manage, see,
and the reason I asked this question is
ERO has done a report a little while ago regarding, um,
bullying and racial incidents in school.
Yeah. And then this year we saw the survey done by um,
Asian Family Services that says 46% of parents reported
that their children are being bullied at school from a
migrant background.
But in your report, what I'm not seeing in terms
of the bullying data is to the kind of, do you have any sort
of granular data on whether you are seeing a reduction in
racial incidents?
Yeah, so this report we did this
year was about cell phones.
So we didn't look at whether we're seeing a reduction in
racial bullying, whether we may return in the future.
We've done big bullying reports
before but it's been a while.
So it's on our wait list of national reviews to do. Okay.
Is go and have a more granular look at bullying.
What we ask teachers and leaders here
and they said to us is, um,
if you haven't got your cell phone there,
if you're not filming the fight,
so people don't wanna have the fight.
Yeah. 'cause it's not been filmed and posted.
Mm-hmm When you're, when you're not clipping
and sending it, you are less likely.
It's a whole bunch of bullying.
But we haven't answered your question.
Look specifically at racial bullying in this report.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks. Well I Jean on cell phones,
I'm just interested was that um,
report brought forward and why?
I know the cell phone report was um, commissioned
by us as Chief Review Officer.
We promised cabinet when it went
through like many other things we would
report on whether it's working.
We do that pretty standardly on a range
of different initiatives that go in place.
Whether that's cohort entry
or many of the changes over time.
Counseling in schools. Um, so this is one that we did.
It's relatively contained so,
and it's a good time of the year to do it.
We tend not to review in term four or term one early
because schools are either wrapping up for the year
or starting the new year.
Okay. Um, new primary.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, I wanted
to ask a question about the uh, back to class um,
attendance report.
Yeah. And um, I know that at the time that report came out,
which you would've completed in the period
that we're covering by the way, Mr.
Chair. Good. Um, that Maori principles
and leaders, um, had concern about
the comments made about the report
and the claim that that was pathologizing Maori wau.
What do you have to say to that? Thank you
For the question. It's a great chance
to clarify
and we had a really good meeting with Teir afterwards
to clarify and what the report says is that in terms
of improved attendance,
that's happening across all our young people,
including our marry learners.
And that should be welcomed and celebrated. Absolutely.
In terms of attitudes to what seeing school is important
for your future, what it says in the report
and what I have said is that we need to do more.
And by we, in that I mean crown agencies,
I mean the Ministry of Education,
I mean the education review office and government
because what were the messages we are sending are not
finding the right resignation with Mary learners
and Mary parents.
And that is about us and as Crown's responsibility
to work more closely with Mary learners to make sure mm-hmm.
That it's communicated in ways
and from people that they trust and learn from.
Um, so we've had a really good productive conversation
with Teer who will support us going forward.
And I know that the ministry has already got action
underway, um, to make sure
that those attendance shifts we are seeing are happening
for all our learners.
And a lot of that is about who's telling you the message
and how it's communicated.
And, uh, supplementary on that one.
Uh, in the um, letter they requested, uh,
four actions being taken by Eero.
Can you tell us, um, have you accepted those calls
and what's happening in that space?
So in terms of we're still working through with,
as you know, it's important that we do it
together and collaborate together.
But one things we are exploring
with them is whether there's an opportunity
for work together about looking about
how our findings can be shared
and how our findings can make sure
that their language in a way that they're never
misconceived, that we're very clear about the need
for education to deliver with learners.
Um, Deb's been holding a lot of that relationship
with though I have also myself met them.
Is there anything you'd like to add? Mm,
Actually I've just been in touch with them this week and,
and what we're proposing is to meet with them mm-hmm again.
Mm-hmm. And um, taking out on Maori team with me
to talk about ways that we can work better together.
Mm. And final supplementary on that one.
Um, do you accept that the messaging around
that cause concern?
Absolutely. And as always, like in all of our reports
and we talked earlier about are there ways
that we can improve other ways we can improve in
how we write it, what we say to make sure
that the core message gets out there
and are other ways that we can improve how we communicate it
and particularly what are the um, ways we can communicate.
'cause the message we really want to spend is
to celebrate the fact that learners are going to school more
and to talk about how we can support all learners
to see education as critical for their future.
Okay. And it does, the Prime Minister says just
Get your Kids to school.
So great message. Mm, exactly.
Great message. So Lawrence, your sub
and then I'll go to JI sub.
Thank you. Um, thank you Chair.
So just on that attendance report. Yes.
Um, one of the biggest barrier you identified in
that a reoccurring thing that comes up is limited transport
and particularly for rural students.
Um, but we're also, but usually the minister is very good in
terms of you put something together
and the minister is very good at taking that on board
and it makes, but you also got commitment from minister
that she's not gonna review anything in the transport
school transport space.
I wondered where does it go next for the barrier
that you have identified
and that is not being,
I guess followed through or being met.
Yeah, so this report didn't actually identify transport
as a barrier because this report contacted within this year.
We've had a whole series of attendance reports.
Though this report this year looked at whether attendance
attitudes have changed, whether people's attitudes to going
to school, whether we've managed to make school more
important for students and learners.
So what we found there really matters is
what the schools do with students.
So as I mentioned before, if you make a student belong,
they're five times more likely to want to go
to school about clear expectations in
that we did say practical supports,
but a lot of those practical school supports
that schools talked about were things
like secondhand uniform.
There was a little bit of walking buses,
but it was about some of those things.
And lastly of all rewards, rewards work
and celebrating groups and teams.
Mm. So this was about those aspects.
What we actually found is one of the significant barriers,
and I hate to sound um, hard on parents again.
Um, but we have managed to shift parents attitudes
to children having a long time off school.
So less parents now are okay with their kids missing a week
of school a term which is great
'cause that's a year of school by the time they're 16.
Yeah. But what we are seeing is more parents are happy now
than they were before for their students
to miss a day or two of school.
And that disrupts the routine of going to school.
So again, we've found that one of the things we need to do
is help parents understand why it's
so important you keep your kids in the routine.
And we have in previous reports looked
at transport but not in this one.
Can I just follow up on that in terms of up page 82 of
that report, it says school's use
of consequences has a negative impact on student attendance
and the attitude to attendance.
But what we're also seeing is a directive in terms
of the current attendance plan is to have a more
of a punitive approach.
And that has been announced publicly.
Um, and we're also seeing funding being put
into that of course.
How would that reconcile with some of the,
your findings in terms of
the negative consequences having an adverse effect
on attitudes to attendance? Cool.
So let me just unpack that a little bit.
So thanks for your question. Cool. Yeah.
So what the report actually finds is when we
looked at regular attendance.
So this is not about children who are not attending,
you know, only attending two days a week
or have got chronic truancy issues when it comes
to chronic truancy errors on the record
of saying the consequences do have a part to play
for parents who won't not can't get their kids to school.
This report looked at the regular attendance, which is kids
who go most of the time, but not all the time.
Interestingly, what we found on consequences,
which I think you may share,
find interesting is it demotivates students
'cause they just don't like consequences,
but it motivates parents.
So parents are more likely to think going
to school is important every day if the school
is taking consequences.
'cause they see it as important.
Students say, well if I don't get to go
to the things I love, if I can't go to the ball
and I can't do the sports.
I don't wanna go to school at all.
So it's a bit of a, so what we've said to schools
and we've put out a good practice report is use carefully.
Um, but we didn't look at those harder consequences
'cause we didn't look at those students
who are most extreme.
That's helpful. Thank you. Thank you. Um,
I'm gonna go to Palm Gees primary then grass.
Oh no. Mine is sub attendance.
Oh, sub, Sorry. And in your primary. Yep.
So, so I have just one sub
and this is, um, about the attendance management becoming
mandatory for, uh, first term 2026.
Yes. So want to know how you are supporting schools for that
and how you plan to evaluate that
and have you thought of how that would be reported?
Absolutely. Thank you for your question.
Um, so I'll talk about nationally
and then Shelly, we'll talk about
what she'll be doing in schools
every day across the country.
Yeah. Um, so nationally we've put out this good practice
report that's been hugely welcomed
because it crunches the data, uses some regressions
and says these are the things
that if you put them in your attendance management plan are
gonna make the biggest difference.
So we've provided that good practice guide to all schools
and we're sending it out to every
principal this week, this week.
Great. Um, in addition to that, um, we are going
to be doing a multi-year evaluation
of the attendance changes.
So we are going to be tracking,
it's such an important topic in New Zealand, we are going
to be tracking whether the investment in attendance
services, whether the, uh, attendance regulation changes,
what works and does it have an impact?
And we can keep reporting
to you publicly about does the investment work
and has what impact in relation to schools.
We've worked it into our work in schools, have we,
So we've been looking in our institutional reports
for quite some time at, um, attendance
and what schools are doing to drive their attendance up.
Um, and so we report on that publicly.
We talk to schools about, uh, what sort of attendance plans
that they, um, have in place.
And from, um, next year of course we will, um,
we'll be looking at, um,
attendance management plans, um, more closely.
So, but it's, it's definitely a, a point
of focus in our reviews and discussion.
And we use the good practice reports.
So all of our evaluators have our good
practice reports to hand.
They, um, have professional learning and development.
So they're able to go in there
and say, have you seen this report?
Do you know what's working? Let's have a look at your plan,
what's the quality of the plan?
And we, um, make a judgment about
that and we report on that. Okay.
Thanks. Yeah. Look. Um, and then I'll come,
Um, just following off from what you said there,
Do you actually, as part of your role, do you assess the
Effectiveness of the first attendance services
That operate outside the schools?
Or do you assess, actually assess those and what do you,
and if you find issues, do you report back?
How do you deal with all that?
Yep. So we did a detailed report on the attendance
services as part of our review of chronic attendance,
chronic truancy, sorry, chronic truancy, uh, last year
where we said we needed significant change
in the attendance service.
Um, we particularly found, uh, it really depended
where in the country you were, what kind
of support you got and how good it was.
We found issues with data sharing,
which were getting in the way of reaching the right kids.
Mm-hmm. And supporting them.
We found that it had gone too far away
from the schools and teachers.
Yeah. And it sometimes for good reasons with trying
to act more in the support
of social services for some of those parents.
So we did a fairly critical report, to be honest,
where we found what some of the issues were.
And the minister has taken those on board
and is investing in attendance services.
Mm. So we will return. Yeah.
And once those changes are in
place, we will look at whether it works. Yeah. Because
That Good. Thank you.
That's all.
Okay. Palm here. Primary?
No, that was actually, oh, that became my sub. Oh, okay.
Sorry. Right. Okay. It was And same. Okay.
So we will go, um, um, back to,
um, well Jean,
Thank you. Um, I want
to move on to, um, NCA Yes.
And the curriculum. We might be able to do them together,
but I'll start with NCA.
So, uh, I just note on page four of the report, it says,
the government's announcement of significant reforms
to the NCA system were deeply informed
by our evaluation reports set up to succeed.
How well is NCA level one working
for our schools and students?
Did you, did that report review the whole of NCA?
No, the, the report reviewed NCA level one,
but made a recommendation that many
of the issues we're seeing at NCA level one are structural
and would therefore be an issue for NCA level two and three.
But it also strongly recommended
therefore not to, to make changes
to NCA level one in isolation.
It's unusual as a country that we have three years
of back-to-back high stakes assessment.
So we said don't make changes
to NCA level one without also deciding what you want to do
with NNC level two and
Three. And just in
terms of that though, did the report look at any
of those things in NCA level two and level three? Should I
Tell you a little bit about what
we looked and what we found?
So you can see why it's relevant, if
that's helpful Very briefly to that.
But the report is about the focus is
on level one. Okay. Right.
So the report looked at NCA level one
and for example, found that it was too flexible with 60%
of teachers saying it's not a reliable measure of skills.
That flexibility in choosing credits we put together
remains at level two and three. The second thing is, but
Did you look at that? We
don't look at It in level two
and three. No. Yeah, we,
Um, we looked at the being too variable.
So for example, when you're twice as likely
to get an excellence in an internal rather than an external,
that's not a credible qualification. Thirdly, we looked at,
Did you look at that for two?
We looked at level one in the
Whole, and then obviously we passed the report
to the ministry and NZ QA
who look about whether it's applies to two and three.
We looked at the, whether it's fair, three quarters
of leaders say that the credits are not an equal amount
of work for an equal amount of effort for an equal reward.
Now, when you've got a, uh, three quarters
of our leaders across the country saying
that you can spend a few hours doing one thing
and get four credits and you can spend a lot
of time elsewhere, like a whole term that's not equal.
And finally, the thing that worries us, which we did look at
for NCA level one, but others, um,
the structure is the structural problem, which applies
to two three, is it's not motivating our students
to keep working through the year.
So because of how NCA is structured,
you can finish very early either
because you've got all the credits,
so you're not gonna bother doing the exams
or you've just even finished as early as September,
you've reached it or you're not going to get there.
And that really concerns us about learners
who are tuning out of learning early in the year
and it concerns principles.
So to answer to your question, I just wanted to elaborate.
These things are structural to NCA,
which is why even though we review NCA one,
we pass those findings onto the minister
and her principal advisory group
because they're quite structural to how NCA itself is set
Up. So
in terms of that though, your, um, methodology Hmm.
You looked at level one, you made con, um,
recommendations about level two
and three without actually doing the same in depth, uh,
analysis of level two and three.
Um, and then that has been taken, uh,
support the entire scrapping of NCEA
as a framework. Is
That a question you would like me to answer?
Mm, okay. So your question was about, so
My, my question's about methodology Okay.
Yep. And, um, for your recommendations. Yep.
And also, um, further to that, was
that peer reviewed? Yeah.
So, um, in terms of methodology on LT level one,
we completed over 6,000 surveys, which
for us is a very large sample level
One. Yes.
Um, we also interviewed over 300 participants.
We visited 21 schools.
We did an international literature review
and a New Zealand literature review.
We looked at admin data,
included the integrated data infrastructure,
which enables us to track children over time.
Um, and we looked at NZQA data
and the Ministry of Education data in terms
of the recommendations we made,
the recommendations were for NC one.
But we did clearly say, and this is as far as we went,
'cause you're right, it's important to pull it to the data
that you should not look at NCA level one in isolation.
That's because through those surveys conversations right
across the country and through our international comparison,
it is very clear that when you're looking at senior
secondary qualifications, you need
to look at those three years together.
For example, a large number of teachers
and principals said that NNC one level one isn't preparing
children for NZ level two.
We looked at that, we record that and we report in it.
And the recommendations say these are the things,
the issues we are seeing with level one.
And this is what we could, you need to look at one, two,
and three together in particular, I famous just finished.
Mm-hmm. Um, in particular, we are concerned by the number
of principals who are choosing
'cause it is a choice not to offer NCA one.
And that concerns us
because at zero we think it's really important
that there is a national qualification
that all students get an equal chance to participate in.
And when we were seeing, and we did go back
and resurvey schools to check that trend,
and we found an, an increasing number, particularly
of high decile schools, or they used to be called,
or, um, schools in more affluent backgrounds choosing not
to offer NCA level one.
So our recommendations are about NCA level one,
but saying NC level one, two, and three, you can't separate
and look at them just separately.
Yeah. And, and find up.
Um, and so given that the methodology
for this report was only to look at level one,
and you've drawn conclusions about levels two and three
and included that in your recommendations, uh,
were you asked to do further work on levels two and three
before the at, at any stage?
Um, and for the proposed change
to the NCA framework, were you d were you asked to do
that work or did you think you should do that work?
So because you could initiate it or the minister could
Initiate it? So our recommendations
are not about level two
and three, except as they affect level one.
Our risk report, we always hold to scope and methodology.
Our scope of methodology was to look at level one,
but also to look at its place in
the qualification framework.
We did an international comparison across those years
so we could see how does it sit.
So we don't look at it in isolation.
That's why we recommended looking at 1, 2, 3 together in
terms of whether we then, um, chose to go out
and review levels two and three.
We did not choose to go out and review levels two and three
and we chose to review level one.
Um, and that is what we looked at.
The minister already set up a principal advisories group,
um, who took forward this report and other data
and evidence from NZQA
and the Ministry of Education in going forward.
Just my clarification, sorry.
I had asked the question about whether this um,
report had been peer reviewed
and you hadn't, um, answered that.
Can I come back to you on that one? Yep. I, sorry.
Yeah, we'll record that as
A know the detail of the, of which peer review of which
of our reports is something I will definitely come back on.
But it's not data that I have with me here today. No
Worries. We'll record that.
Um, I've just gotta start on this,
um, or two up.
One is when you do report such as this Yes.
Do you, uh, do any reflection on how they're received, um,
in the public domain?
Absolutely. So we survey, um, key stakeholders
who have participated as one
of our performance measures
you'll have seen in our annual report.
Yeah. And we, and we, some of that is the ministry.
Some of that is the stakeholders who participate in our
work, uh, key sector leaders.
And we are asked them how useful has it been?
Our role as eero is to review and report.
It's to make sure that decisions, both policy decisions
and decisions in schools are made on the
best evidence we can provide.
So it's so important to us that that evidence is accurate,
robust, but also, as you said, chair helpful.
As you've seen in our performance report.
It's a metric we exceeded this year in terms of
how helpful our national reports are,
but it's always a work on.
So given that, given what you said about the strength
of opinion on NCA level one through the research,
were you surprised by some of the sector leaders
who came out swinging suggesting that the
proposed removal of NCA one was somehow not
what the sector, um, supported?
What do you mean the scrapping of the whole NCA?
Well, we're talking about NCA one level one.
So this start, it was around NCA level one.
But what response were you Well, I'm, I'm asking if
the, uh, if Arrow was surprised by the reaction
of some of the industry leaders to essentially the removal
of NCA level one given this, the removal of the whole thing.
Mm. Yeah, but I'm talking about the report on level one.
So the diocese she's referring to as level one.
So I'm just looking at that.
Um, in answer to your question, uh, we've done a lot
of engagement afterwards with people,
help people understand our report.
Yeah. We are always really willing to talk to sector.
And I presented at the secondary principal associations
and gathering about what our report found.
Yeah. What we heard in there, which was what we expect is
that people recognize the flaws of the current system,
but finding good solutions is not easy.
So as we all discussed
and it set out in the report,
which is why we've included a different number
of options in the report, it's really hard
to find a qualification that is both credible
because it's challenging enough
and not so hard that people are leaving school
without qualifications.
It's hard to find a good balance
between doing it throughout the year
and motivating our students to study throughout the year,
but not having an overweight and high stakes exams.
And it's hard to find a balance
between those vocational paths
and making sure that people stay motivated in learning,
but we don't also pathway them out
so they can't get back in.
So the short answer to your question is,
in the discussions I have had personally with the sector,
they're very reflective
around designing qualifications here in other
countries is not easy.
Um, but that everyone we spoke to could see the necessity
because of the number.
And this is about NNC one
because it has become
so optional whether principles are offering it or not.
Okay. Supplementaries
And, oh, sorry, Lawrence did have his part. Yeah.
Cool. Um, just supplementaries on that.
Uh, it's really interesting you talk about credibility
because this is, what you are saying is not
what we heard yesterday from NZ qa.
Because NZ QA is the one that holds
that benchmarking internationally with N-Z-Q-C-F, that
our NCA system, at least currently as it stands,
particularly for two and three, is credible
and very much comparable to the international benchmark.
But what you're saying, are you specifically saying
that level one is not credible?
So when we look at level one where our judgment
of credibility, is it fair?
Is it, um, consistent? Um, and is it valued?
You know, we have and report in more detail
what makes a good qualification.
And because we found, for example, that uh, seven out
of 10 employers do not value NCA level one, um,
and don't think it is a good measure of skills,
even a higher number than that.
Don't nine out 10 say it's not a reliable measure
of attitudes to work, um, because of the variability.
And in particular because three quarters of leaders say
that the credits are not equal
and you've got a large number of students
finishing before the end of the year.
That leads us to say in that terms the qualification
of NCA level one is not a credible
national non qualification.
I would just like to add, and I know,
sorry, I won't speak at length.
Um, I'm also very conscious answering your question
that we've got students up
and down the country who are literally just
finishing their exams now.
Yeah. Um, and so we would still say that they, we want
to shout out to the students who are doing the work
'cause they're working within, I'd also like out
to shout out to the many schools we visited who have got NCA
to work for them despite, rather than
because of the structure of the qualification.
Um, does that answer your question or is that
Yeah. Um, I mean,
I think just a follow up question from that,
and I, so
I understand that, but then the current issue
that it is gonna be facing is, I, I guess part
of the question is what involvement have you since then
with the shaping of the, the new system?
Because the current system, the risk
and in terms of some of the regular impact statement has
been expressed is that it actually going
to punish students even further with the new whatever.
It's gonna be the equivalent of NCA level one,
because they're gonna be fewer people
and particularly vulnerable populations
or marginalized populations.
There's gonna be less opportunity for them
to actually complete the completion rate of n what is going
to be the NC level one equivalents gonna be down.
So I just wanna check with you, um, in terms
of whether the advice you give, which you can only do
what you do objectively here is the report.
But how have you been engaged throughout the process?
Thank you for asking. Uh,
it's a really good thing to ask us.
So we report, we review, we report,
and then as I said, it's really important that we ensure
that our information is used.
So what we do do is provide explanations of what we found.
I mean, if we are having 6,000 teachers
and principals spending their time
to participate in our research,
it's really important we feed that through
so we provide additional, um, explanations of our report.
One of those things that's in the report,
and I'm always very happy to share afterwards if you're
interested, is looking at how well NCA level one delivers
for some learners who are not an academic route.
And we found that it delivers
for them less well than a more academically able students.
They find it less useful, less motivating.
Um, and so it's less So I've got additional, um,
advice we have given just which breaks the data.
So it's just the data and I'm always very happy to share
that with you in terms of additional data we've provided.
It's all in the report. Yeah.
But to save you having to go through the very big report,
we're very happy to pull it out.
And this could be something else that,
sorry, just one last one.
That was what you said last time.
No, no, no, but just, I just wanna know in terms
of comparisons, if you're able to provide us
as a post hearing question in terms of if you compare this
with what was on schooler
and whether this also considered other external factors
that are not, that we don't find.
So I just want to know and we can happy
to provide as a opposed hearing.
I can. Right. We'll just record that
as a post hearing. Thank you.
Um, grant, You've gotta stop.
And then you were talking before about
and um, in, in C level one Yeah.
And then obviously the flow on through Yes.
And you're talking about the preparedness
and getting that balance right.
In a system where it prepares all the
caters for all the students.
But you, what sort of feedback have you had from the,
the tertiary sector on what they, their expectations
and their views of, of the NCA level one
and then through the systems in terms of particularly
around, um, being prepared able to, uh,
complete do exams in that
'cause whilst NCA doesn't have to do an exam when you get
to university, that changes. Yeah.
Not necessarily. Mm-hmm.
Ask your question. Um, unfortunately,
RA doesn't have a remit to work in the tertiary space.
No. Um, so it's outside our appropriation
outside get feedback on, so we don't work
with tertiary because it's outside our scope.
Yeah. Understand that we leave that
to the Ministry of Education.
We did a survey, employers mm-hmm.
And we, we talked to schools, parents, students, boards,
employers, and some in that secondary tertiary space
where they're doing secondary provision.
Okay. But it's unfortunately outside our scope
to move into tertiary.
Okay. Okay.
Um, thanks. I just, yes.
NCA still, um, I just want to understand is this,
um, was this one that was initiated by ERO
or by the minister?
The minister? This one was initiated
By the minister and she's publicly said that commission
And it was only for, um, level one.
Gotcha. Um, so my question is around also what, uh,
and it could apply to all of the reports,
but we are talking about this one.
Um, but what the Kopa Maori methodology is that's used, um,
in your evaluation and research.
That's, and evaluation
and research that's used to, um,
inform your insights. Mm-hmm.
Yep. So, um, David, do you want to
Talk about that one?
So we're sticking with the NCA
Oh, I think it, it could be used broadly, right?
Um, I mean as your methodology. Okay.
Your Kapa Maori methodology. So our methodology,
We are actually making partnership
with the peak bodies that we work with.
So we run under the
Maori principles when we're working in Kapa Maori research,
which means that everything starts with a conversation
that focuses Maori working with Maori for Maori.
Um, and we, we discussed
and agree together how we will approach certain researchers.
And I just wanna be clear also, it changes throughout iwi
and Hapu because Maori are not homogenous people.
So this could look different
in every single space that we work in.
Wow. Yeah. And for example though,
our most recent report on English
and maths, um, we work very closely with, um, some,
we were brilliant to be involved to look at how
that works in ed,
but it looks very different depending on
who we're working on on the report.
Mm. But it's a, a clear focus,
as you'll have seen in all our reports, is to make sure
that we are able to report for marine learners.
Um, and we, particularly in our national reviews,
make sure we have a very high sample.
So you can check that in our methodologies.
And then we also have a strong focus on going
to English medium schools.
Returning to earlier question that have high Maori role.
It's important that we look at all learners in New Zealand.
Minister we start, Um, just a quick suck on, um,
your work that you're doing
and the research, um, that having that, um, Maori focus, um,
is quite a unique area, specialized skill.
So, um, have you got the workforce
and um, have you got the support to be able to bring on
and educate people
and support them into, um, into doing that
such a specialized in complex area?
Have you got the workforce?
Are you, have you got the capability to build it? Yeah,
Luckily for us, our small team, the,
the Maori medium team is made up of specialists in,
in Maori education.
Majority of them, I'd say over 95%
of them are fluent speakers of,
and they all have quite high qualification levels.
They come with the education background,
but also they, most of them have a senior leadership,
you know, master's in education, leadership qualification,
very, um, I would say well ready
for research.
But we also have a particular Ranga Maori team,
which is small and growing.
What's most important for us in which we will be speaking
with about also is ensuring
that we maintain the partnerships with peak bodies.
Yeah. And, and work alongside with them
because in amongst them are also some esteemed researchers,
um, that contribute. Well, that's
Great. Thank you. Okay, we'll
go,
we've got two final primaries in terms of our timing.
So we'll go to Willow, Jean and then Lawrence
and then we'll be rounding up. So
Yeah, thank you.
Uh, my questions are around, um,
arrow's role in the curriculum
and I'm really interested in
what role you've played in the refresh of the curriculum.
Um, and just linking that question earlier about
the Kopa Maori framework
and approach, um,
your role in reviewing. Hmm.
Excellent. So if you take that in parts,
I'll talk about the work we do
to review curriculum
implementation, which is one of our roles.
Uh, Shelly will talk about the role that we play in relation
to, um, the quality assurance of the curriculum.
Um, and then, uh, Deb will talk a bit about the last
of your questions, ma.
So IRO has always played this role in making sure
that changes in our education system.
We understand the impact, uh, we know
how they've been rolling out, we know whether it delivers
the curriculum is a key part of that.
So we've always looked at the curriculum.
We looked at digital and technology way back.
Uh, we've looked at science along the way
and the most recent things we've looked at, of course,
is English and maths relationships
and sexuality education, uh, out air New Zealand histories.
In each of these areas, we go
and do one of our national reports.
We walk with teachers and principles.
And the key role that we can play in where we add value is
to do real time, uh, ongoing evaluation
so we can work out early what is working for teachers
and leaders and where they need more support.
So that's where, in English and maths, we found out
that we need more support for rural areas.
Mm. Yeah. So that's the role that we play
and we've continued to play that role going forward.
It's a standard part of hero's business.
Um, in relation to ji,
would you like to take that one next
step? Yeah. And then we'll come
To, so, um, we had a, a small team again, uh,
from the Kapa worked with the MUR extensively, uh, and our,
or KO and speakers of the real, so they reviewed, um,
RA and through the process.
Um, and what they found is that through those Wang docs
that they were in,
RA in particular were meeting the criteria, um,
with really clear language and structure and alignments.
Um, and RO most met the criteria
and what, what I recall them saying is
that they were seeing more coherence and flow in the area.
Um, uh, sorry, that's for, um, I just want to broaden
that out to the new, um, ro
That's the new motto.
Uh, sorry. For the other curriculum areas that is out
for consultation currently, what role did ERO play in, um,
that both in NZC and ro?
So you mean the ones which are about to be put in place?
So we obviously review once they're in place,
but in terms of the creation, shall, do you want
to talk about the role we play in
the development of the curriculum?
Which I think, is that right what you're asking?
Oh, so I think that that's with Carolyn. Carolyn.
Um, do you want to just come
forward and talk about the role we play?
So this is about our role in the development
of the curriculum and what we've covered
is how we see if it works.
So in the second half of 2024,
we are involved in independent quality assurance reviews on
a, um, large number of draft curriculum documents, um,
in English and maths.
Um, so in the ones that are out now, um, we haven't
provided that same role.
So you haven't had, you haven't had any involvement in the
curriculum for, uh, year zero to 10 in NZC or,
Uh, no. Our, uh,
independent quality assurance was involved on years
zero to six English, uh, zero to 13 mathematics.
So it was earlier
In the process that that's for the quality assurance part.
But is there any other part of the organization that has any
Curriculum governance? Don't we,
Uh, we on our curriculum governance board
because we're the people who are going
to review whether it works.
But if we return to s remit, EITs remit is to review
and report on education and to provide that expert advice.
So we review what happens in schools, um,
and obviously Shelly and every day when we're out in schools
across the country, curriculum in schools is one
of the key things we review.
How is it working in schools?
And then we pull this up into national reviews and we report
Here. Thank you. But I'm
just not clear. Mm-hmm.
Uh, in terms of what role you have, um,
and are you being consulted?
Are you provide being, are you providing any advice?
Have you seen the drafts of the curriculum
before they were released for consultation?
So the role we played was, um,
to provide independent quality assurance on some
of the earlier, uh, curriculums of
What Can you tell me which ones those are? Sorry. Uh,
So, uh, zero to six English, uh, zero
to 13 mathematics we provided views on, but English
and, and Maori needed.
Would you like us to return
with a more detailed set out about the role
that we play in the curriculum?
Um, it's conscious of your time
and you may want to ask me about some
of the other curriculum reports, like, um,
but we will return with that detail.
Um, I think there's a sub from
Lawrence. Yeah. And just
to sign signature share
that this actually segues quite nicely
and that I don't have a primary after this.
Okay. Um, in terms of this, the sub on on curriculum,
because one of the things you mentioned is the relationship
with sexual education curriculum in your
report and let's talk about it.
Mm-hmm. You mentioned that parents
and father of students from rainbow communities are more
likely to want their children
to learn about RSE topics earlier,
especially topics on diverse identities and bodies.
Um, and for some of these gender identity,
it's almost tripling of children, a child
that does not identify as part of the rainbow communities.
Yet in the latest RSE curriculum we see
that gender diversity and d um, has been removed
from the latest RIC curriculum.
We're also seeing all references to gender refer the only
to men and women doesn't recognize non, uh, transgender
or non-binary identities.
I want to just check with you too, is what then is your role
after you put out a report on the new RSE curriculum
and also since then,
because of the fact that you talk to parents of wau,
what have you been hearing from parents of wau
and people of ta tawi
and rainbow communities around the new
RSE curriculum? Cool.
Um, thank you for the question.
So, um, we often review their relat sexuality
education curriculum and guidance.
We've done it a couple of times.
Uh, this review looked at particularly whether students are
getting an adequate amount of our relationship
with sexuality education.
So one of the key findings,
and I will come to answer your question, is three quarters
of school leavers say
that they did not learn enough about relationships
and sexuality education
to keep themselves safe after they finished school.
That really troubles us. So those are things like consent,
which came out strongly staying safe online.
Say that strongly. When we looked about why
that was happening, half
of leaders have found consulting increasingly challenging
and often face very difficult community meetings
around having to consult on what they should teach
and a quarter of schools deliver it on an ad hoc basis.
Hmm. So one of our key re findings we report is
that relationship and sexuality education is too
important to leave to chance.
Mm-hmm. Which is why we called
for having a clear national curriculum.
Mm-hmm. Embedding in that things where there is wide
and broad spread agreement that we need to do more,
which is particularly around consent and online safety and,
and also reporting that we were strongly encouraging it
to be taught more at senior secondary.
Mm-hmm. And particularly because boys often engage later.
Mm-hmm. And there is a big gap between boys
and girls engagement and what they're wanting.
Mm-hmm. And you may be interested to know
that girls are wanting more in early education
and boys are wanting a lesson later.
Put simplistically. So, um, in relation to this topic,
we found on a gender identity, there was a wide split
with a third of parents wanting more
and a quarter wanting less.
That's what we commented in the report.
What we said is that it's really important going forward
that we have a clear national curriculum, um,
that it is taught, um, that schools no longer have
to be stuck between communities
and they can just inform parents
and parents can choose to withdraw.
And that we get more of it toward later
and that we meet more of our young people's needs.
In terms of your question about what we're seeing now,
those curriculum changes are just going through,
so we won't know yet about the impacts of the curriculum.
We will continue to evaluate the impact of the curriculum
and we will return to it again.
But we don't know yet what the changes will be.
But can I just check the change has been made? Yes.
So how can you please comment on the change to the fact
that people from my communities,
our communities are now invisible in the new RSE curriculum?
So what we do is review
and report what's happening in schools.
So whilst the changes have been made, we are not yet able
to review and report about how that's fed
through into the curriculums being used in schools.
Okay. We will return to this topic
and we do return to it regularly.
Final stuff. So just based on, uh, to that point
that we've removed reference to trans
and non-binary within our school system, um,
and the evidence that you have via your report,
what risks does that highlight
to Rainbow Tam within our school system?
I'm sorry, I didn't quite follow your question.
In relation to ER's role, can you just clarify?
So ERO completed a report on the, um, relationship
and sexuality guidelines, which highlighted
how effective the guidelines were in meeting the needs
of Rainbow, uh, tam within our education system.
Um, what we did was we reviewed whether
what was being taught in schools, which is not the same
as the guidelines, um, was meeting the needs of students
or students and what students
wanted and what parents wanted.
And we showed this very diverse views around
what students want, what parents want,
and how it meets different needs.
It's not the guidelines, it's
what they're actually being taught.
And our biggest concern is about a quarter
of schools leaving something as critical as relationship,
sexuality, education to be taught on an ad hoc basis
and three quarters of learners leaving saying
that they didn't learn enough about core things.
So that's the report we did at that point of time.
Since then, the curriculum changes have occurred
and we will go back out again in the future as we do
with all of our reviews and see what the impact is.
Okay. I think that's clear.
Uh, and we've come seen our time with you.
Not clear at all, not clear.
We really appreciate, uh, the time that you've given us.
Uh, we look forward to seeing you here.
Again, we don't see you before Christmas.
Um, have a fabulous Christmas, great New Year to you
and your team, uh, and enjoy your new role. I
Just wanna say thank you very much
and thank you for the patience of letting me return
with some of the detail,
which I'll get to you as soon as possible. Thank you.
No worries at all. Excellent. Thank you.
Well done members. Um, we're going private now. Thank you.
Um.